---
title: Doc & Tee's Service Finder for Bristol City Council
slug: Doc&Tee created the front-end service finder for Bristol City Council, which consumes an Open Referral UK compliant API.
date: 01/01/1984
---

# Doc & Tee's Service Finder for Bristol City Council

_Damien Doherty, Director, Doc & Tee Ltd_

We are a full-service creative design agency and have been working with WellAware for a number of years. We designed and built their previous service directory, which had been used for social prescribing. WellAware were chosen by Bristol City Council (BCC) to be part of a pilot scheme to look at adopting the open data standards. We were then invited by WellAware and BCC to take part and develop a user front end to interrogate the API being created.

## The process

As this was part of a pilot scheme there were a lot of meetings and talks around how best to develop a new tool that Placecube had been commissioned to develop that would help capture and assure the data. So we were involved in all these discussions from the start – though our piece of work would only ever be dependent on the outcomes of Placecube's work. As we had experience in helping WellAware develop their initial site we were on hand to advise on the structure of their existing data – along with facilitating the exporting of this data.

## The challenges

We have got to work with some great and interesting people and companies along the way. We have also developed a tool that will be useful and beneficial to many other organisations.

## The benefits

We have got to work with some great and interesting people and companies along the way. We have also developed a tool that will be useful and beneficial to many other organisations.

## Advice / learnings

The main barrier for any organisation wanting to move from an existing system to the new data standards will be the work involved in restructuring and re-tagging their data. This will take time but ultimately it is the right steps to be taking in order make this data as useful (and used) as possible.

Contact details

[Doc & Tee website](https://docandtee.com)
damien@docandtee.com

